# Effective surrogates for genetic variation in conservation planning

To protect species for the long term, nature reserves and other protected areas need to represent the intra-specific genetic variation found within each species. By conserving the adaptive and neutral patterns of genetic variation found across the species’ distribution, protected areas can foster adaptive processes and secure the genetic lineages that make up a species. However, genetic data are expensive and time consuming to obtain. Here we show that environmental and geographic distance variables are effective surrogates for capturing intra-specific genetic variation in conservation planning. We obtained occurrence and genetic data from the IntraBioDiv project for 27 alpine plant species collected over the European Alps using a gridded sampling scheme. For each species, we identified loci that were potentially under selection using outlier loci methods, and mapped their main gradients of adaptive and neutral genetic variation across the grid cells. We then used the cells as planning units to generate spatial prioritisations. By randomly prioritisations for each species, we verified that prioritisations that captured a larger proportion of environmental variation and geographic spread also tended to capture more intra-specific adaptive and neutral genetic variation. Furthermore, we investigated whether prioritisations generated using surrogate-based targets in addition to conventional area-based resulted in more effective prioritisations. We discovered that prioritisations generated using just area-based targets generally captured a large proportion (> 80 %) of the intra-specific adaptive genetic variation detected in each species. Whereas, prioritisations generated using amount-based targets alone failed to secure most species’ intra-specific neutral genetic variation, and were improved with additional of surrogate-based targets. These surrogates were based on freely available data, and could be applied to any study region across the world.
