# Conserving evolutionary processes

## Abstract

Protected areas are used to safeguard biodiversity patterns (e.g. species, populations) and the processes that sustain them (e.g. adaptation, gene flow). Since the resources available for conservation are limited, conservation efforts need to be allocated in a cost-effective manner that will increase the long-term persistence of biodiversity. However, evolutionary processes are rarely considered when assessing existing protected areas or planning for the establishment of new reserves. My PhD project involved developing new methods to incorporate evolutionary processes into conservation planning, investigating potential surrogates for genetic data, and prioritizing the expansion of the global protected area system to enhance adaptive processes. This talk will highlight the key findings from my PhD project. I will show how evolutionary principles can be operationalized to guide reserve selection, and how failing to consider them during reserve selection can potentially undermine conservation efforts. By explicitly considering evolutionary processes, conservation efforts stand a far greater chance at enhancing the long-term persistence of biodiversity.

## BioSketch

Jeffrey Hanson recently submitted his PhD thesis at The University of Queensland, Australia. Under the guidance of Richard Fuller and Jonathan Rhodes, Jeffrey has developed methods to operationalize evolutionary processes for setting conservation priorities. He is passionate about improving the cost-effectiveness of conservation activities. His interests include spatial prioritization, geographic information systems (GIS), species distribution modeling, landscape genetics, and developing open source software. For more information, check out his website (http://jeffrey-hanson.com).
